## Raspberry Pi OS project introduction or how to efficiently learn operating system development?

A few years ago I opened the source code of the Linux kernel for the first time. At that time I considered myself more or less skillful software developer, I knew a little bit of assembler and C programming and had a high-level understanding of the major operating system concepts, such as process scheduling or virtual memory management. But my first attempt was a complete fail - I understand almost nothing.

For other software projects that I have to deal with, I have a simple approach that usually works very well: I find the entry point of the program and then start reading the source code, going as deep as necessary to understand all details that I am interested in. This approach works well, but not for something as complicated as an operating system. It is not only that it took me more than a week just to find an entry point - the main problem was that I quickly find myself in a situation where I am looking at a few lines of code,  and I have no idea how to find any clues about what those lines are doing. This is especially true about the low-level assembler source code, but it works no better for any other part of the system that I tried to investigate. 

But I don't like the idea of dismissing a problem just because it looks complex from the beginning. Even more, I do believe that there are no complex problems - instead, there are a lot of problems we simply don't know how to address efficiently. So I started to look for an effective way to learn OS development in general and Linux in particular.

### Challenges in learning OS development

I know that there are tons of documentation and books, written about Linux kernel development, but neither of them provides me with the learning experience that I want. One half of the material I find to high-level, and I already know it. With the second half I have very similar problem that I have with exploring the kernel source code: as soon as a book goes deep enough, 90% of the details appear to be related not to the core concepts, but instead to some security, performance or legacy considerations as well as to millions of features that Linux kernel supports. So instead of learning core operating system concepts you always end up digging into implementation details of those features.

You may be wondering why do I need to learn operating system development in the first place? For me, the main reason is that I was always interested how things work under the hood. And it is not just curiosity: the more difficult task you are working on - the more and more often things begin to trace down to the operating system level. You just can't make fully informed technical decisions if you don't understand how everything works at a lower level. Another thing is that if you really like a technical challenge, working with OS development can be an exciting task for you.

Next question you may ask is why Linux? Probably, other operating systems would be easier to approach? The answer is that I want my knowledge to be, at least in some way, relevant to what I am currently doing and may realistically expect to be doing in the future. Linux is perfect in this regard because nowadays everything starting from small IoT devices to large servers tend to run Linux.

When I told that most of the books about Linux kernel development didn't work well for me - I wasn't quite honest. There was one book that I was capable to fully understand, even being a novice in OS development, and that also explains some essential concepts using the actual source code. This book is "Linux Device Drivers", and no wonder it is one of the most famous technical books about Linux kernel. It starts with introducing source code of a simple driver that you can compile and play around with. Then it begins to introduce new driver related concepts one by one and explains how to modify the source code of the driver to use new concepts. That is exactly what I refer to as a "good learning experience". The only problem with this book is that it focuses explicitly on driver development and tells very little about core kernel implementation details.

But why did nobody created a similar book for kernel developers, not device driver authors? I think this is because if you use the current Linux kernel source code as a base for your book, this is just not possible. There is no function, structure or module that can be used as a simple starting point because there is nothing simple about Linux source. You also can't introduce new concepts one at a time because in the source code they are very closely related one to another. After I realized this an idea came to me: if Linux kernel is too vast and too complicated to be used as a starting point for learning OS development, why don't implement my own OS that will be explicitly designed for learning purposes? In this way, I can make the OS simple enough to provide a good learning experience. Also if this OS will be implemented mostly by copying and simplifying different parts of the Linux kernel source, it would be straightforward to use it as a starting point to learn Linux kernel as well.In addition to the OS I decided to write a series of lectures that teaches major OS development concepts and fully explains the OS source code.

### OS requirements

So I decided to start working on the project, which later becomes the [RPi OS](https://github.com/s-matyukevich/raspberry-pi-os). The first thing I had to do is to define what parts of kernel development I consider "basic" and what components are not so essential and can be skipped, at least from the beginning. In my understanding each operating system has 2 fundamental goals:

1. Run user processes in isolation.
1. Provide each user process with a unified view of the machine hardware.

To satisfy the first requirement, RPi OS needs to have its own scheduler. If I want to implement a scheduler, I also have to handle timer interrupts. The second requirement implies that the OS should support some kind of drivers and provide system calls to expose them to user applications. From the beginning, I don't want to work with complicated hardware, so the only drivers I care about are drivers that can write something to screen and read user input from a keyboard. Also, the OS needs to be able to load and execute a user program, so naturally it needs to support some file system and be capable of understanding some executable file format. It also would be nice if the OS can support basic networking, but I don't want to focus on this from the beginning. So that is basically the things that I can identify as "core concepts of any operating system".

Now let's take a look at the things that I want to ignore. 
1. **Performance** I don't want to use any sophisticated algorithms in the OS. I am also going to disable all caches and other performance optimization techniques for simplicity.
1. **Security** It is true that the RPi OS has at least one security feature: virtual memory. Everything else can be safely ignored.
1. **Multiprocessing and synchronization** I am quite happy with my OS being executed on a single processor core. In particular, this allows me to get rid of a vast source of complexity - synchronization. 
1. **Support for multiple architectures and different types of devices** More on this in the next section.
1. **Millions of other features that any production-ready operating system supports**

### How Raspberry Pi comes into play

I already mentioned that I don't want the PRi OS to support multiple computer architectures and even a lot of different devices. This decision becomes even stronger after I dig into Linux kernel driver model. It appears that even devices with similar purposes can largely vary in implementation details. This makes it very difficult to come up with simple abstractions around different driver types and reuse driver source code. To me, this seems like one of the primary sources of complexity in Linux kernel, and definitely, I want to avoid it in the RPi OS. Ok, but what kind of computer should I use then? I clearly don't want to test my bare metal programs using my working laptop, because I honestly not sure that it is going to survive. More importantly, I don't want people to buy an expensive laptop just to follow my OS development exercises - I don't think anybody will do this. Emulators look like more or less good choice, but I want to work with a real device because it gives me different feeling - feeling that I am doing something real rather than playing with bare metal programming.

I ended up by using raspberry PI, in particular [Raspberry Pi 3 Model B](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b/). Using this device looks like an ideal choice for a number of reasons.

1. It cost something around 35$. I think it should be an affordable price.
1. This device is specially designed for learning. Its inner architecture is as simple as possible, and that perfectly suits my needs.
1. This device uses ARM v8 architecture. This is a simple RISC architecture, it is very well adapted to OS authors needs, and it doesn't have so many legacy requirements as, for example, popular x86 architecture. If you don't, believe me, you can compare the amount of source code in `/arch/arm64` and `/arch/x86` folders in the Linux kernel.

The OS is not compatible with older versions of Raspberry PI, because neither of them support 64 bit ARM v8 architecture, though I think that support for all future devices should be trivial.

### Working with community

One major drawback of any technical book is that very soon after release each book becomes obsolete. Technology nowadays is evolving so fast that it is almost impossible for book writers to keep up with it. That's why I like the idea of "open source book" - a book that is freely available on the internet and that encourages its readers to participate in content creation and validation. If book content is available on github this makes it very easy for any reader to fix and develop new code samples, update book content and participate in writing new chapters. I understand that right now the project is not perfect and at the time of writing it is even not finished. But I still want to publish it now, because I hope that with the help of the community I will be able not only to complete the project faster but to make it much better and much more useful than it was from the beginning. 

